---
title:  "BitLocker is Designed to Have This Problem"
permalink: /tpm-genie
---

The purpose of a system is what it does [^posiwid]. The purpose of BitLocker is
to generate articles about interposer attacks.

<div class="mermaid" id="fig:interpose">
sequenceDiagram
    participant host as Host system
    actor interposer as interposer
    participant tpm as TPM

    loop Boot
        host->>tpm: Measure some software into PCRs
    end
    host->>tpm: Load a sealed blob with PCR policy P
    host->>tpm: Satisfy P with PolicyPCR in policy session S1
    note right of tpm: Assert that PCRs are as required by P
    rect rgb(255, 127, 127)
        host->>tpm: Unseal the key using S1
    end
    note left of host: Decrypt disk and boot
    note right of interposer: Decrypt disk and<br/>post on HackerNews
</div>

<!--more-->

*Disclaimer: I work on TPM at
[Trusted Computing Group](https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/). As always, the
views expressed in this blog are my own.*

Every year or so, we see another version [^genie] [^trammell] [^riverloop]
[^dolos] [^stacksmashing] of a paper called "I Hacked
BitLocker in 25 Seconds With This Soldering Iron and the Power of Friendship".

And every year, I assume a conversation like this occurs in Redmond:

> "Should we fix BitLocker to deal with this issue?"

> "No, we (picked our threat model 20 years ago|are too afraid of the code|sacked
> the people responsible for that so the execs could get bigger bonuses last year)."

Invariably, the telephone game that is tech journalism and social media pollutes
the conversation, and people end up asking "why does the TPM suck so much?"
(Answer: It's not the TPM that sucks in this situation).

Security is about solving threat models, not extra credit. People (e.g., I) have
asked the BitLocker team to update their threat model in the past. They haven't so far.
They probably won't this year, or next time this topic hits my feed. So I am going to
assume that BitLocker will never change. But here is how a full-disk encryption
system like BitLocker could use the TPM properly. If Microsoft wants to hire an
intern to finally fix BitLocker's threat model some summer, that would be cool too.

# The Problem

See the [diagram at the top of the post](#fig:interpose).

The naive implementation of a system that uses the TPM to unseal a disk
encryption key causes the disk
encryption key to appear in-the-clear on the TPM bus (typically,
[LPC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Low_Pin_Count) or
[SPI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Serial_Peripheral_Interface)). It's not
hard to read the 1s and 0s on these wires and convert them back into data.
And nobody assumed that it would be. The TPM may as well be shouting the
BitLocker key back to the CPU.

So, all these papers about breaking BitLocker are really about parsing LPC or
SPI framed TPM commands.
There isn't, like, cryptography or anything happening here.

# The Solution

So, how can a full-disk encryption product protect itself from sophisticated
attackers with access to a Raspberry Pi?

In terms of applied crypto toolboxes and the threat model, we would say that we
want the host and the TPM to perform some sort of
[key establishment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Key_exchange) and then use
that key to protect the secrets that have to traverse the bus.

Since this particular threat model includes a passive interposer who can read
the bus but not modify/drop commands/responses, any type of key establishment
would help here. Let's say that we use
[Key Encapsulation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Key_encapsulation_mechanism)
as our key-agreement mechanism.

TPM supports TPM-specific RSA and ECC KEMs,
designed to allow use of a restricted decryption key for this use-case,
though without using the term "KEM" as that wasn't popular until NIST's
PQC competition despite being apparently coined in [2001](https://eprint.iacr.org/2001/108.pdf).

<div class="mermaid">
sequenceDiagram
    participant host as Host system
    actor interposer as interposer
    participant tpm as TPM

    loop Boot
        host->>tpm: Measure some software into PCRs
    end
    host->>tpm: Load a sealed blob with PCR policy P
    host->>tpm: Satisfy P with PolicyPCR in policy session S1
    note right of tpm: Assert that PCRs are as required by P
    rect rgb(127, 255, 255)
    critical Key exchange
        host->>tpm: Generate an asymmetric keypair K and get Kpub
        host->>tpm: Encapsulate a session key SK for S2 to the TPM Kpub
    end
    end
        rect rgb(127, 255, 127)
        host->>tpm: Unseal the key using S1 <br/> using S2 for response parameter encryption
        host->>host: Decrypt the unsealed key using SK
    end
    note left of host: Decrypt disk and boot
</div>

# The Work

1. Create a `restricted` ECDH `decrypt` key in the TPM during boot (do not use RSA unless you aren't in a hurry to boot).
2. Perform the encapsulation to create an additional encrypt session for the unseal command.
3. Decrypt the encrypted response parameter using the key you encapsulated in (2).

# The Future

Interested in **active** interposers? Now you're thinking with interposers. You
need some way for the host and the TPM to mutually authenticate.
Check out what my colleagues and I are working on: <https://www.osfc.io/2022/talks/protecting-tpm-commands-from-active-interposers/>

[^posiwid]: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_purpose_of_a_system_is_what_it_does>
[^genie]: <https://research.nccgroup.com/2018/03/09/tpm-genie-interposer-attacks-against-the-trusted-platform-module-serial-bus/>
[^trammell]: <https://conference.hitb.org/hitbsecconf2019ams/materials/D1T1%20-%20Toctou%20Attacks%20Against%20Secure%20Boot%20-%20Trammell%20Hudson%20&%20Peter%20Bosch.pdf>
[^riverloop]: <https://riverloopsecurity.com/blog/2021/01/ieee-paine-tpm-lpc-bus-implant/>
[^dolos]: <https://dolosgroup.io/blog/2021/7/9/from-stolen-laptop-to-inside-the-company-network>
[^stacksmashing]: <https://www.tomshardware.com/pc-components/cpus/youtuber-breaks-bitlocker-encryption-in-less-than-43-seconds-with-sub-dollar10-raspberry-pi-pico>